The New York Times Paywall
Every newspaper in the country is paying close, close attention [to the Times paywall], wondering if they can get readers of online news to pay. Is that the future, or a desperate attempt to recreate the past?. . . Will paywalls work for newspapers?
— Tom Ashbrook, host of On Point, National Public Radio1

On March 28, 2011, The New York Times (The Times) website became a restricted site. The home page and section front pages were unrestricted, but users who exceeded the allotted “free quota” of 20 articles for a month were directed to a web page where they could purchase a digital subscription.
The paywall was launched earlier on March 17, 2011, in Canada, which served as the testing ground to detect and resolve possible problems before the global launch. The Times website had been mostly free for its entire existence, except for a few months in 2006–2007 when TimesSelect was launched. Traditional newspapers had been struggling to maintain profitability in the online medium, and they were eager to see how the public would react to the creation of a paywall at the most popular news website in the U.S.
Martin Nisenholtz, the senior vice president of Digital Operations at The Times, was optimistic about the willingness of users to pay:
I think the majority of people are honest and care about great journalism and The New York Times. When you look at the research that we’ve done, tons of people actually say, “Jeez, we’ve felt sort of guilty getting this for free all these years. We actually want to step up and pay, because we know we’re supporting a valuable institution.2

However, many commentators, both in the blogosphere and in the traditional media, were openly critical of this approach. Michael DeGusta, a blogger, represented the critics’ view: “It’s sad that instead of competing for the future by pricing for the digital age, The Times has opted to fight an inevitably doomed battle to hold on to the past.”3

Professors Vineet Kumar, Bharat Anand, Sunil Gupta and Felix Oberholzer-Gee prepared this case with the help of Research Associate Dharmishta Rood. This case was developed from published sources, and the presentation of some data have been simplified to aid in classroom discussion. HBS cases are developed solely as the basis for class discussion. Cases are not intended to serve as endorsements, sources of primary data, or illustrations of effective or ineffective management.

Copyright © 2012, 2013 President and Fellows of Harvard College. To order copies or request permission to reproduce materials, call 1-800-545- 7685, write Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston, MA 02163, or go to www.hbsp.harvard.edu/educators. This publication may not be digitized, photocopied, or otherwise reproduced, posted, or transmitted, without the permission of Harvard Business School.

512-077 The New York Times Paywall

Mathew Ingram of GigaOm considered The Times paywall as a stopgap arrangement and went on to say, “If paywall is your only strategy, then you are doomed.”4 Katharine Weymouth, publisher of The Washington Post, another major newspaper, strongly resisted a paywall:
For us, we believe at the moment it doesn’t make sense. We are making a bet for the long term. We want to be around as The Washington Post for a long time and many generations to come, and at the moment, we think that the best way to do that is to have a free website that is open to everybody and attract as many people as we can to spend as much time as they can with our journalism, and assume that that will bring them back for more.5

By December 2011, digital subscribers for The Times grew to 390,000, and Arthur Sulzberger, Jr., the company’s chairman, described the paywall as a success that represented “a robust new revenue stream.”6
However the long-term prospects of paywalls remained uncertain. The subscriber growth was slowing down, and many of the paid subscribers of The Times were enticed by the introductory offer of 99 cents for a 4-week subscription. A previous experiment with a paywall, TimesSelect, was abandoned in 2007 after The Times secured 227,000 paying customers.
Was the paywall a good idea for the long-term? Would it provide a foundation for a sustainable business model as The Times approached an ever-evolving technology and media landscape?

Company Background
The New York Times Company was a leading global multimedia news and information company with 2011 revenues of $2.3 billion and an operating profit of $57 million, and operated The New York Times, the International Herald Tribune, The Boston Globe, and About.com. (See Exhibit 1 for company structure, Exhibit 2 for business units and their revenues, and Exhibit 3 for company financials.) The company defined its core purpose as “enhance[ing] society by creating, collecting and distributing high quality news, information and entertainment.”7
The New York Times, the flagship daily newspaper of the company, was founded on September 18, 1851, by journalist and politician Henry Jarvis Raymond, and former banker George Jones. By 2011, the newspaper had won 106 Pulitzer Prizes, the most of any news organization. Reflecting on The Times’s importance, Michael Hirschorn, the contributing editor of the Atlantic, remarked:
The Times still, I think to a remarkable degree, does set the agenda. You really can trace almost any major story these days to something that originally appeared in The Times. The problem is that once it reaches the public, they may not even know it came from The Times.8

In spite of its prize-winning journalism, The Times was facing significant pressures. Its subscription and revenues had steadily declined over the years (see Exhibits 3 and 4). Its advertising revenues in 2011 were down by over 6% compared with 2010 ad revenues, and in spite of cost cutting, the operating profit in 2011 was 76% less than the previous year. In January 2012, the company sold its Regional Media Group consisting of 16 regional newspapers for $143 million in cash.9
The Newspaper Industry
The New York Times was not alone in feeling this pressure—the entire newspaper industry was facing significant challenges. Overall circulation in the industry for both weekday and weekend newspapers was declining (Exhibit 5). Traditional sources of newspaper revenues—subscription, retail, and classified advertising—were also declining (Exhibit 6). In contrast, most of the costs for editorial staff, production, and distribution were fixed and had very little room for reduction. Table A shows the revenue and cost structure of a typical U.S. newspaper.
Table A Revenue and Cost Breakdown of a Typical U.S. Newspaper, circa 2010
